docs/index.md, before:

# Cloud Native Remote Sensing with Python

Welcome to the comprehensive guide on cloud-native remote sensing with Python! This course covers modern tools and techniques for working with large-scale Earth observation datasets using cloud-based approaches.

## 🎯 What You'll Learn

This course provides a structured introduction to the essential Python libraries and cloud-native technologies for remote sensing:

- **XArray**: Multi-dimensional labeled arrays for efficient data manipulation
- **STAC (Spatio Temporal Asset Catalog)**: Standardized way to discover and access geospatial data
- **Dask**: Parallel computing library for scaling your analysis
- **Zarr**: Cloud-optimized array storage format
- **XEE**: XArray Earth Engine integration for seamless data access

## 🚀 Why Cloud-Native Remote Sensing?

Traditional remote sensing workflows often involve downloading large datasets to local machines, which is:

- **Time-consuming**: Downloading terabytes of data takes hours or days
- **Storage-intensive**: Requires significant local storage capacity
- **Computationally limited**: Constrained by local machine resources
- **Not scalable**: Difficult to process large areas or long time series

Cloud-native approaches solve these problems by:

✅ **Accessing data on-demand** - Only download what you need  
✅ **Leveraging cloud compute** - Scale processing power as needed  
✅ **Using optimized formats** - Zarr and COG for efficient data access  
✅ **Parallel processing** - Dask for distributed computing  
✅ **Standardized discovery** - STAC for finding relevant datasets  

## 📚 Course Structure

### Getting Started

Learn the basics of setting up your environment and working with Google Colab for cloud-based analysis.

### Fundamentals

Master the core libraries: XArray for data manipulation, STAC for data discovery, Dask for parallel computing, Zarr for storage, and XEE for Earth Engine integration.

### Data Processing

Apply your knowledge to real-world tasks like calculating spectral indices, masking clouds, extracting time series, and aggregating data.

### Advanced Topics

Scale your analysis with advanced Dask techniques, cloud computing platforms, and optimization strategies.

### Practical Examples

Work through complete examples including NDVI analysis, land cover classification, change detection, and multi-temporal analysis.

## 🛠️ Key Technologies

### XArray

XArray extends NumPy and Pandas to N-dimensional labeled arrays, making it perfect for satellite imagery with dimensions like time, latitude, longitude, and bands.

```python
import xarray as xr

# Open a dataset
ds = xr.open_dataset('sentinel2_data.nc')

# Select data by labels
subset = ds.sel(time='2023-01-01', band='red')

# Perform calculations
ndvi = (ds['nir'] - ds['red']) / (ds['nir'] + ds['red'])
```

### STAC

STAC provides a common language to describe geospatial information, making it easier to discover and access satellite imagery.

```python
from pystac_client import Client

# Connect to a STAC catalog
catalog = Client.open('https://earth-search.aws.element84.com/v1')

# Search for Sentinel-2 imagery
search = catalog.search(
    collections=['sentinel-2-l2a'],
    bbox=[lon_min, lat_min, lon_max, lat_max],
    datetime='2023-01-01/2023-12-31'
)
```

### Dask

Dask enables parallel computing in Python, allowing you to work with datasets larger than memory.

```python
import dask.array as da

# Create a Dask array
x = da.from_zarr('large_dataset.zarr')

# Computations are lazy
result = x.mean(axis=0)

# Trigger computation
result.compute()
```

### Zarr

Zarr is a cloud-optimized format for storing chunked, compressed N-dimensional arrays.

```python
import zarr

# Create a Zarr array
z = zarr.open('data.zarr', mode='w', shape=(10000, 10000), 
              chunks=(1000, 1000), dtype='f4')

# Write data
z[:] = data

# Read data
subset = z[1000:2000, 1000:2000]
```

### XEE

XEE (XArray Earth Engine Extension) allows you to use Earth Engine datasets with XArray.

```python
import xee
import ee

ee.Initialize(project='spatialgeography')

# Open an Earth Engine ImageCollection as XArray
ds = xr.open_dataset(
    'ee://COPERNICUS/S2_SR',
    engine='ee',
    geometry=ee.Geometry.Point([lon, lat]).buffer(10000),
    scale=10
)
```

## 💡 Prerequisites

- **Python Programming**: Basic knowledge of Python
- **NumPy/Pandas**: Familiarity with array operations
- **Remote Sensing**: Basic understanding of satellite imagery
- **GIS Concepts**: Knowledge of coordinate systems and projections

## 🎓 Learning Path

1. **Beginners**: Start with Getting Started → Fundamentals
2. **Intermediate**: Focus on Data Processing → Practical Examples
3. **Advanced**: Dive into Advanced Topics and optimization

## 🌟 Key Features

- **Hands-on Examples**: Every concept includes working code examples
- **Google Colab Integration**: Run examples in your browser without setup
- **Real-world Datasets**: Work with actual Sentinel-2 and other satellite data
- **Best Practices**: Learn industry-standard approaches
- **Scalable Solutions**: Techniques that work from local to cloud scale

## 📖 How to Use This Course

1. **Read sequentially** for a complete learning experience
2. **Jump to specific topics** using the navigation menu
3. **Run the code examples** in Google Colab or your local environment
4. **Complete the exercises** to reinforce your learning
5. **Explore the reference** section for detailed API information

## 🤝 Contributing

This course is open-source and welcomes contributions! If you find errors, have suggestions, or want to add content, please contribute via GitHub.

## 📝 License

This course content is available under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

---

Ready to get started? Head to [Introduction](getting-started/introduction.md) to begin your cloud-native remote sensing journey!

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

- :material-rocket-launch:{ .lg .middle } **Getting Started**

    ---

    Set up your environment and learn the basics of cloud-native remote sensing workflows.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Start Learning](getting-started/introduction.md)

- :material-book-open-variant:{ .lg .middle } **Fundamentals**

    ---

    Master XArray, STAC, Dask, Zarr, and XEE - the core tools for cloud-native analysis.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Learn Fundamentals](fundamentals/xarray-basics.md)

- :material-cog:{ .lg .middle } **Data Processing**

    ---

    Apply techniques for spectral indices, cloud masking, time series, and aggregation.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Process Data](processing/spectral-indices.md)

- :material-rocket:{ .lg .middle } **Advanced Topics**

    ---

    Scale your analysis with Dask, cloud platforms, and optimization strategies.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Go Advanced](advanced/scaling-dask.md)

- :material-code-braces:{ .lg .middle } **Practical Examples**

    ---

    Complete workflows for NDVI analysis, land cover, change detection, and more.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: See Examples](examples/ndvi-analysis.md)

- :material-book-multiple:{ .lg .middle } **Reference**

    ---

    Comprehensive API documentation and best practices for all libraries.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Browse Reference](reference/xarray-api.md)

</div>

Commit message:

Update site title and home page with GEE risk assessment and Python patent focus

docs/index.md, after:

# Open GIS - Python-based Cloud Native Geospatial Analysis

Welcome to the comprehensive guide on **Open GIS** and cloud-native remote sensing! This curriculum moves beyond proprietary platforms, focusing on the power of Python, open-source standards, and distributed cloud computing.

## ⚠️ The proprietary "GEE" Vendor Lock-in Risk

While Google Earth Engine (GEE) is a powerful tool, relying solely on it for groundbreaking geospatial research carries significant professional and intellectual risks:

- **Vendor Mercy**: GEE is a proprietary service owned by a private corporation. They have the power to change access terms, pricing, or even lock down years of your "hard work" and code scripts at any time.
- **Intellectual Property & Patents**: Developing innovative methodologies "natively" inside the GEE ecosystem can complicate patent applications. As a proprietary "black box," the underlying infrastructure belongs to Google, which may limit an author's ability to be fully credited or appreciated for groundbreaking innovation.
- **Scientific Reproducibility**: High-stakes geospatial analysis should be verifiable and portable. Proprietary platforms hinder true independence.

## 🐍 Why Python First?

Python is the **native home** for advanced geospatial analysis and Deep Learning. By developing in an open-source Python environment:

1. **Innovation & Patents**: You develop in an environment you control. Innovative algorithms developed in Python are more suitable for patenting as they are built on open foundations, ensuring the author receives full credit.
2. **Native Development**: Most cutting-edge AI and Geospatial libraries (PyTorch, TensorFlow, XArray) are developed in Python *first*. You gain immediate access to the latest breakthroughs.
3. **Future Confidence**: Open source means reproducibility. Your work is not tied to a single company's roadmap or survival.

## 🎯 What You'll Learn

- **XArray**: Multi-dimensional labeled arrays for efficient data manipulation
- **STAC (Spatio Temporal Asset Catalog)**: Standardized way to discover and access geospatial data
- **Dask**: Parallel computing library for scaling your analysis
- **Zarr**: Cloud-optimized array storage format
- **XEE**: XArray Earth Engine integration for seamless data access

## 🚀 Why Cloud-Native Remote Sensing?

Traditional remote sensing workflows often involve downloading large datasets to local machines, which is:

- **Time-consuming**: Downloading terabytes of data takes hours or days
- **Storage-intensive**: Requires significant local storage capacity
- **Computationally limited**: Constrained by local machine resources
- **Not scalable**: Difficult to process large areas or long time series

Cloud-native approaches solve these problems by:

✅ **Accessing data on-demand** - Only download what you need  
✅ **Leveraging cloud compute** - Scale processing power as needed  
✅ **Using optimized formats** - Zarr and COG for efficient data access  
✅ **Parallel processing** - Dask for distributed computing  
✅ **Standardized discovery** - STAC for finding relevant datasets  

## 📚 Course Structure

### Getting Started

Learn the basics of setting up your environment and working with Google Colab for cloud-based analysis.

### Fundamentals

Master the core libraries: XArray for data manipulation, STAC for data discovery, Dask for parallel computing, Zarr for storage, and XEE for Earth Engine integration.

### Data Processing

Apply your knowledge to real-world tasks like calculating spectral indices, masking clouds, extracting time series, and aggregating data.

### Advanced Topics

Scale your analysis with advanced Dask techniques, cloud computing platforms, and optimization strategies.

### Practical Examples

Work through complete examples including NDVI analysis, land cover classification, change detection, and multi-temporal analysis.

## 🛠️ Key Technologies

### XArray

XArray extends NumPy and Pandas to N-dimensional labeled arrays, making it perfect for satellite imagery with dimensions like time, latitude, longitude, and bands.

```python
import xarray as xr

# Open a dataset
ds = xr.open_dataset('sentinel2_data.nc')

# Select data by labels
subset = ds.sel(time='2023-01-01', band='red')

# Perform calculations
ndvi = (ds['nir'] - ds['red']) / (ds['nir'] + ds['red'])
```

### STAC

STAC provides a common language to describe geospatial information, making it easier to discover and access satellite imagery.

```python
from pystac_client import Client

# Connect to a STAC catalog
catalog = Client.open('https://earth-search.aws.element84.com/v1')

# Search for Sentinel-2 imagery
search = catalog.search(
    collections=['sentinel-2-l2a'],
    bbox=[lon_min, lat_min, lon_max, lat_max],
    datetime='2023-01-01/2023-12-31'
)
```

### Dask

Dask enables parallel computing in Python, allowing you to work with datasets larger than memory.

```python
import dask.array as da

# Create a Dask array
x = da.from_zarr('large_dataset.zarr')

# Computations are lazy
result = x.mean(axis=0)

# Trigger computation
result.compute()
```

### Zarr

Zarr is a cloud-optimized format for storing chunked, compressed N-dimensional arrays.

```python
import zarr

# Create a Zarr array
z = zarr.open('data.zarr', mode='w', shape=(10000, 10000), 
              chunks=(1000, 1000), dtype='f4')

# Write data
z[:] = data

# Read data
subset = z[1000:2000, 1000:2000]
```

### XEE

XEE (XArray Earth Engine Extension) allows you to use Earth Engine datasets with XArray.

```python
import xee
import ee

ee.Initialize(project='spatialgeography')

# Open an Earth Engine ImageCollection as XArray
ds = xr.open_dataset(
    'ee://COPERNICUS/S2_SR',
    engine='ee',
    geometry=ee.Geometry.Point([lon, lat]).buffer(10000),
    scale=10
)
```

## 💡 Prerequisites

- **Python Programming**: Basic knowledge of Python
- **NumPy/Pandas**: Familiarity with array operations
- **Remote Sensing**: Basic understanding of satellite imagery
- **GIS Concepts**: Knowledge of coordinate systems and projections

## 🎓 Learning Path

1. **Beginners**: Start with Getting Started → Fundamentals
2. **Intermediate**: Focus on Data Processing → Practical Examples
3. **Advanced**: Dive into Advanced Topics and optimization

## 🌟 Key Features

- **Hands-on Examples**: Every concept includes working code examples
- **Google Colab Integration**: Run examples in your browser without setup
- **Real-world Datasets**: Work with actual Sentinel-2 and other satellite data
- **Best Practices**: Learn industry-standard approaches
- **Scalable Solutions**: Techniques that work from local to cloud scale

## 📖 How to Use This Course

1. **Read sequentially** for a complete learning experience
2. **Jump to specific topics** using the navigation menu
3. **Run the code examples** in Google Colab or your local environment
4. **Complete the exercises** to reinforce your learning
5. **Explore the reference** section for detailed API information

## 🤝 Contributing

This course is open-source and welcomes contributions! If you find errors, have suggestions, or want to add content, please contribute via GitHub.

## 📝 License

This course content is available under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

---

Ready to get started? Head to [Introduction](getting-started/introduction.md) to begin your cloud-native remote sensing journey!

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

- :material-rocket-launch:{ .lg .middle } **Getting Started**

    ---

    Set up your environment and learn the basics of cloud-native remote sensing workflows.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Start Learning](getting-started/introduction.md)

- :material-book-open-variant:{ .lg .middle } **Fundamentals**

    ---

    Master XArray, STAC, Dask, Zarr, and XEE - the core tools for cloud-native analysis.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Learn Fundamentals](fundamentals/xarray-basics.md)

- :material-cog:{ .lg .middle } **Data Processing**

    ---

    Apply techniques for spectral indices, cloud masking, time series, and aggregation.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Process Data](processing/spectral-indices.md)

- :material-rocket:{ .lg .middle } **Advanced Topics**

    ---

    Scale your analysis with Dask, cloud platforms, and optimization strategies.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Go Advanced](advanced/scaling-dask.md)

- :material-code-braces:{ .lg .middle } **Practical Examples**

    ---

    Complete workflows for NDVI analysis, land cover, change detection, and more.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: See Examples](examples/ndvi-analysis.md)

- :material-book-multiple:{ .lg .middle } **Reference**

    ---

    Comprehensive API documentation and best practices for all libraries.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Browse Reference](reference/xarray-api.md)

</div>
